Notes.md, before:

# Phase-field fracture models

## Running examples

```
docker run --rm --name phase-field -it -v ${pwd}:/Fractures-code -w /Fractures-code -p 8888:8888 dolfinx/lab:stable

docker exec -it phase-field bash

pip install meshio
mpirun -n 8 python EX.py
```

## Coding up MSPEN

### Concatenating vectors

I need to concatenate two PETSc vector arrays in such a way that I can easily pull them apart.
I need to be able to put the concatenated vector into a PETSc solver.

There seems to be a deprecated method `PETSc.Vec.concatenate()` which would have done exactly as I needed.
Now I'm hoping that functionality has been moved to `PETSc.Vec().createNest()`.

I can nest vectors with:
```python
vecs = PETSc.Vec().createNest([u.x.petsc_vec,v.x.petsc_vec])
```
If I want to extract vectors from the nest, I do:
```python
u_out, v_out = vecs.getNestSubVecs()
```

### Custom line search

I need to be able to switch between MSPIN and AltMin based on the residual.
This will require a custom line search, since this will take advantage of the implicit fixed point iteration,
which is not common for SNES problems.

Might be an idea to adapt Powell's dogleg method, which chooses a step optimized along a line between two vectors.
Those two vectors would be the step from the fixed point iteration and the Newton step.

New idea (03.13.2025): Davidenko-Branin trick, using analysis on 2D hyperplane containing fixed point iteration and the line connecting the Newton and anti-Newton directions.

### Creating a .msh from a .geo (copied from MEF++ cheatsheet)

Convert a .geo into a .msh with the line
```
gmsh fichier.geo -3 -o nomsortie.msh
```
Replace `-3` with `-2` when using 2D meshes.

### Running code in Docker container from command line

First make sure the Docker container is running.
Open bash in the container with
```
docker exec -it <container name> sh
```
Change directory to the shared folder:
```
cd shared
```
Now anything can be run in the shared folder with standard commands:
```
mpiexec -n 8 python -u EX_CTFM.py
```
(Include the `-u` to output to the terminal.)

### Parallelization

It's important that objects used in multiple places are properly gathered and scattered when they are needed.

For example, a recent hurdle, the vectors 'u' and 'v' must be updated when assembling 'Euv' and 'Evu'.
This is not done in the course of the iteration, and so must be done when 'Euv' and 'Evu' are needed when multiplying by the Jacobian.

## SSH into Graham cluster

`ssh mccoidc@graham.alliancecan.ca`, using SSH key and DUO multi-factor app.

## Research program

Now that the version of MSPIN from the paper is shown and admitted to be only a marginal improvement, I can focus on newer developments and more bespoke approaches.
Moving forward, I will suggest three new approaches to augmenting alternate minimization with a Newton iteration.
For each, I will run this on three types of examples and compare effectiveness through number and size of linear solves, number and size/complexity of nonlinear solves, and wall clock time to achieve a given error tolerance.

Once these basic approaches have been tested and compared, I should focus on the broader analysis of the FP-N framework I'm developing.

- [ ] Implement Davidenko-Branin trick
- [ ] Compare augmented Newton methods
- [ ] Check code validity
- [ ] Compare with Alena's results

### Newton approaches

All approaches will make use of the Davidenko-Branin trick, which flips the Newton direction to maintain monotonicity.

Long term, these approaches and the DB trick should be coded into a PETSc module.
Short term, especially ahead of SIAM/CAIMS, we'll patch something together in FEniCSx.

#### Trust region

If the Newton step lies closer to the fixed point iterate than it does to the previous iterate, then we can accept it.
If not, we should take the fixed point iterate.

#### Line search

The Newton direction is taken, but with a step size equal to the step between the previous iterate and the fixed point iterate.

#### Two-step

Take a step to the fixed point iterate, then another step of the same length towards the Newton iterate.

### Examples

#### Basic shear?

#### L-shaped

Commit message:

switching to custom Newton solver
PETSc's built-in looks to be the main cause of issues

Notes.md, after:

# Phase-field fracture models

## Running examples

```
docker run --rm --name phase-field -it -v ${pwd}:/Fractures-code -w /Fractures-code -p 8888:8888 dolfinx/lab:stable

docker exec -it phase-field bash

pip install meshio
mpirun -n 8 python EX.py
```

## Coding up MSPEN

### Concatenating vectors

I need to concatenate two PETSc vector arrays in such a way that I can easily pull them apart.
I need to be able to put the concatenated vector into a PETSc solver.

There seems to be a deprecated method `PETSc.Vec.concatenate()` which would have done exactly as I needed.
Now I'm hoping that functionality has been moved to `PETSc.Vec().createNest()`.

I can nest vectors with:
```python
vecs = PETSc.Vec().createNest([u.x.petsc_vec,v.x.petsc_vec])
```
If I want to extract vectors from the nest, I do:
```python
u_out, v_out = vecs.getNestSubVecs()
```

### Custom line search

I need to be able to switch between MSPIN and AltMin based on the residual.
This will require a custom line search, since this will take advantage of the implicit fixed point iteration,
which is not common for SNES problems.

Might be an idea to adapt Powell's dogleg method, which chooses a step optimized along a line between two vectors.
Those two vectors would be the step from the fixed point iteration and the Newton step.

New idea (03.13.2025): Davidenko-Branin trick, using analysis on 2D hyperplane containing fixed point iteration and the line connecting the Newton and anti-Newton directions.

### Creating a .msh from a .geo (copied from MEF++ cheatsheet)

Convert a .geo into a .msh with the line
```
gmsh fichier.geo -3 -o nomsortie.msh
```
Replace `-3` with `-2` when using 2D meshes.

### Running code in Docker container from command line

First make sure the Docker container is running.
Open bash in the container with
```
docker exec -it <container name> sh
```
Change directory to the shared folder:
```
cd shared
```
Now anything can be run in the shared folder with standard commands:
```
mpiexec -n 8 python -u EX_CTFM.py
```
(Include the `-u` to output to the terminal.)

### Parallelization

It's important that objects used in multiple places are properly gathered and scattered when they are needed.

For example, a recent hurdle, the vectors 'u' and 'v' must be updated when assembling 'Euv' and 'Evu'.
This is not done in the course of the iteration, and so must be done when 'Euv' and 'Evu' are needed when multiplying by the Jacobian.

## SSH into Graham cluster

`ssh mccoidc@graham.alliancecan.ca`, using SSH key and DUO multi-factor app.

## Research program

Now that the version of MSPIN from the paper is shown and admitted to be only a marginal improvement, I can focus on newer developments and more bespoke approaches.
Moving forward, I will suggest three new approaches to augmenting alternate minimization with a Newton iteration.
For each, I will run this on three types of examples and compare effectiveness through number and size of linear solves, number and size/complexity of nonlinear solves, and wall clock time to achieve a given error tolerance.

Once these basic approaches have been tested and compared, I should focus on the broader analysis of the FP-N framework I'm developing.

- [ ] Implement Davidenko-Branin trick
- [ ] Compare augmented Newton methods
- [x] Check code validity
- [ ] Compare with Alena's results

### Newton approaches

All approaches will make use of the Davidenko-Branin trick, which flips the Newton direction to maintain monotonicity.

Long term, these approaches and the DB trick should be coded into a PETSc module.
Short term, especially ahead of SIAM/CAIMS, we'll patch something together in FEniCSx.

Due to the weird interplay between the nonlinearities, or just because Python shell matrices are challenging, I've had to drop the built-in PETSc Newton solver for a custom one (which I probably should have done first).
I will still use the built-in PETSc KSP solvers.

#### Trust region

If the Newton step lies closer to the fixed point iterate than it does to the previous iterate, then we can accept it.
If not, we should take the fixed point iterate.

#### Line search

The Newton direction is taken, but with a step size equal to the step between the previous iterate and the fixed point iterate.

#### Two-step

Take a step to the fixed point iterate, then another step of the same length towards the Newton iterate.

### Examples

#### Basic shear?

#### L-shaped
